+++
title = "RuneQuest player intro"
description = """
Glorantha as a gaming setting with decades of material created for it, and this
can make it intimidating. However, intimate knowledge of all that is really
needed to start playing and have fun in the setting. Here is a player
introduction that describes a common knowledge starting place for players in my
*RuneQuest* game.
"""
thumb = '/img/pavis-walls.jpg'
thumbattr = 'Pavis Walls, <a href="https://www.deviantart.com/scravagghiupilusu959">Dario Corallo</a>'
categories = ["rpg", "runequest"]
tags = ["intro"]
+++

.. sidebar:: attribution

   This player introduction is adapted from the introductory material prepared
   for his players by `RHW <https://basicroleplaying.org/profile/8059-rhw/>`_
   on the Chaosium forums, and is used with permission.

|rq| is a fantasy RPG that's unlike traditional D&D in in several ways:

  |rq| has no character classes or alignments; characters are defined by their
  culture, the gods they follow, and the Runes that inspire them.

  Nor does the |rq| system use levels; instead, characters advance in skills
  and abilities by using them in the course of play. Anyone can try to pick a
  lock, cast a spell, or decipher some ancient runic script.

  Combat in |rq| is exciting, immersive, visceral, and always potentially
  deadly; players should be mindful event the lowest trollkin cna take out an
  experienced warrior with a lucky blow. [RQ]_

This article gives you the basic information that your characters are likely to
know about the setting; you really don't need to understand much other than
this article and where to find things on your character sheet to get started.


Who are we?
===========

You are all young members of the *Colymar*, a tribe of the human, *Heortling
people* that live in *Sartar*, a mountainous kingdom named for its first king,
situated on the eastern edge of *Dragon Pass*, a strategically important
crossroads in the world of *Glorantha*.

* To the north-east and through the montains and hills lies the Lunar Empire of
  the Red Moon, the invaders that have recently conquered your lands. There
  were many battles, and much blood was spilled.

* To the south and south-west in the coastal low-lands lie the (as-yet
  unconquered, and reasonably friendly to you) lands of Hendrikiland,
  Heortland, and Esrolia. Your people mostly came from these lands in the
  past.

* To the east and over the mountains lie the arid chapparal and wasteland
  plains of Prax around a thin strip of arable land lying along the River of
  Cradles. Some of your cousins have emigrated there.

The most important gods to your people are the Storm god, Orlanth, and the
Earth goddess Ernalda, but you worship many other gods and goddesses as well,
and venerate may spirits of the lands around you.

Your ancestral, tribal lands are excellently positioned, nestled in the fertile
and well-protected Nymie Vale between a range of mountains to the west, and
craggy hills to the east. The fortified Clearwine village is your tribal seat,
but your tribe also controls many other villages, shrines, and lands for
grazing and farming.

The current year is 1615.


About this occupation...
========================

So, apparently we fought some kind of war with this Lunar Empire to the north
east?

**How did we do in this war?** You lost. The Lunars defeated you in 1602,
sacked the kingdom's capital, Boldhome, and installed a puppet king (and,
eventually, a Lunar governer). In the ten years that followed the Lunars
cruelly secured their rule via a comprehensive policy of assassination, martial
law, and taxation.

**What did we do then?** Throughout this period, some of your people
collaborated with the occupiers, and some of your people resisted (although not
always in a coordinated or effective fashion).

Two years ago (1613), that changed. Kallyr Starbrow of the Kheldon tribe
attempted to forge the Ring Of Sartar as a means to galvanize a group of tribes
into active rebellion; she was only partially successful. The wickedly clever
Lunar general, Fazzur Wideread, through a combination of effective military
tactics and political trickery, dealt with the rebellion swiftly; he found
another legitimate descendant of King Sartar and successfully seated him as a
puppet king in place of Kallyr. The Lunar Red Emperor rewarded Fazzur by making
him the Govnerner-General of Dragon Pass.

In the two years since that time, your tribe has been ruled by Queen Leika
Black Spear, a decidedly anti-Lunar ruler. You continue to resist Lunar
occupation.

**How much do we hate the Lunar occupiers?** A lot. Not only do the Lunars
march around in their hob-nailed sandals and red cloaks wherever they'd like to
go, they tax people, crucify people they don't like, and worship an evil
chaos-tainted moon goddess. On top of this, they want to kill our god,
Orlanth. And they don't speak our language. And they smell like vinegar.


What can we do about this?
==========================

That's a very good question, and it depends a bit on what kind of character you
want to play, and more specifically, what kind of cult you primarily belong
to. While all your people give worship to all your gods, the god or goddess you
most favour often aligns with your outlook on life (and, practically, how you
want to approach your adventures).

**I want to hit things.** You might want to start by becoming an initiate of a
war god. Sartar has lots and lots of those, but here are the most important of
those gods and goddesses to our tribe:

*Orlanth*. King of the Storm Gods, Lightbringer, and Father of Time. The Lunar
occupiers have made worship of Orlanth illegal, but everyone in our tribe knows
where our worship of Orlanth happens; officially, those who worship Orlanth
*claim* to worship Barntar the Plowman (a farmer god) but we still have a
temple to Orlanth in Clearwine.

*Humakt*. God of Death and Truth, Swords, and War. Those who pledge to Humakt
may never be resurrected: those things that are dead must stay dead.

*Vinga*. Red-haired Goddess of War, Spear Maiden, Defender of the
Innocent. When the Lunars defeated us in 1602, many of our male warriors lost
their lives, and have since. Since that time, worship of Vinga in our tribe has
become much more popular with the women whose lives were torn apart when their
fathers, sons, and husbands were killed in battle.

**I'm not exactly the fighting type...** Our people have important gods to help
with all parts of life, and often the best way to fight is to have a plan and
not swing a sword. Here are the most important other gods and goddesses to our
tribe:

*Ernalda*. Hearthmother, Wife of Orlanth, Queen of the Earth. We worship her to
help ensure our crops prove out, to ensure that we continue to have healthy
children, and to keep our families healthy and united.

*Chalana Arroy*. The Healing Goddess, Peacebringer. Initiates of this goddess
take a vow of pacifism, and may never take up a weapon against another living
person, even in self-defense. She is the source of all healing magic in the
world, and is a Lightbringer, and one of Orlanth's closest allies.

*Issaries*. The God of Trade, another Lightbringer. Issaries is the god of
merchants and marketplaces and created the skill Bargain and the common
Tradetalk language. He is important to keep our people prosperous and connected
with our friends and allies in other tribal lands.


**What gods must we watch out for?** Everyone worships gods, and their plenty
of bad people worshipping bad gods.

*The Red Moon*. Rufelza the Shepelkirt, goddess of the Lunar Empire. She was
once a peasant girl who was made into a goddess by the Seven Mothers. You can
see her in the sky; she's that red moon in the northern sky. Her magic
waxes and wanes every week as she cycles through her phases. She is tainted by
chaos and is evil, despite the reassurances of her deluded followers.

*Seven Mothers*. The god-heroes who created the Red Moon; they are a twisted
parody of our holy Lightbringers. They are both worshipped together, and
individually, but they're all bad news.

*Yelm*. The Imperial Sun God; mostly worshipped by Dara Happans, who are part
of the Lunar Empire. Orlanth killed this self-important god during the God
Time, userhing in the Storm Age. Then, when he realized that darkness
everywhere was not the answer, he and his Lightbringer companions went into the
underworld to bring him back, and thus created the Great Compromise, bringing
us into the Time of History.

*Chaos gods*. There are many gods far worse that want only death, destruction,
or perversion, and only monsters and raving psychopaths worship them and
speaking their names out loud isn't really safe.


Who else do we know about?
==========================

Our people occupy only a small part of the world,

**Elder races.** While humans are everywhere in the world now, that is a fairly
recent thing. The world is also filled with races that have been as long as
humans have, and perhaps even longer. While their time has largely passed, they
still have great secrets they keep.

*Uz*. Darkness loving, cave-dwelling, large, tough people who can see in the
dark and like clubs and mattocks. Selfish, greedy, hungry, brutal thugs who
love children (both to play with, and to eat) and music. There are several
kinds of Uz; much more than humankind, they range in size, strength, and
power. The weakest of their kind are like small children in size; the greatest
of their kind stand almost as tall as giants, and are as strong as an ox.

*Aldryami*. The children of the forest and plants. If you cut them, they don't
bleed, but they do leak sap. Mostly, they keep to the deep forests, and our
tribe doesn't have a history of good relations with them.

*Durulz*. Beast-folk who seem created from waterfowl. They have webbed feet,
have feathers, and have a beak instead of a mouth. Ducks helped Orlanth kill
Yelm, so the Dara Happans (Lunars) don't like them much; in fact, Governer
Fazzur cannily decided to officially blame Kallyr Starbrow's rebellion on the
Durulz by putting a bounty on their heads. Our tribe refuses to participate in
this monstrosity; the durulz are our friends.

*Mostali*. The ancient, underground makers created by the forge god,
Mostal. They are immortal, and are almost as mysterious as Dragonnewts. They
are geniuses at metalworking, and know the secret of how to make Iron (and, it
is reputed, even more powerful alloys).

*Dragonnewts*. Ancient beast-folk descended from dragons. We secretly get along
well with Dragonnewts; there are still many of them that live, well hidden, in
Dragon Pass; however what they *want* and what they *believe* is a hotly
contested topic that most common folk just don't bother to try to understand.

**Foul creatures.** The world is a dangerous place. There are many foul
creatures, but they can all be generally divided into three groups: beast-folk,
foul creatures that *can think*; monsters, creatures of chaos or evil magic
that *do not think*; beasts, natural creatures that are, nonetheless,
dangerous.

*Beast Folk*. The noble Durulz's origins are mysterious, as are, for example,
the Centaur horse-people. No dobut, some evil god or follower of chaos magics
got jealous and decided to create corrupt, foul hideous mockeries of these
noble beast-folk. The most notorious of these are the goat-people, the *Broo*
(their only interest is to rape, kill, and spread pestilence, and should be
killed on sight), but there are also foul mockeries of the horse-people built
on top of scorpions, crabs, and spiders.

*Monsters*. Monsters are hideous, corrupt mockeries of natural animals, created
by chaos magic. They come in all shapes and sizes, and all must be rooted out
and dispatched.

*Dangerous creatures*. Big grizzly bears, lions, and dinosaurs, might not be
chaos-tainted, but that doesn't make them easy to live next to. The world is
filled with animals that we know how to live with peacefully (like dogs, cows,
and sheep) or who pose no threat to us (like birds and fish), but it's also
filled with animals that we need to treat with caution and respect.

**Spirits.** All the elder races and creatures belong to this mortal plane, but
this world is more than just the physical place that we walk around in and
touch. The world is also filled with *spirits* that are at once a source of
great mystery, magic and power, but also a source of madness and disease. Our
peoples' shamans are those who deal with the spirits around us, and as you
might expect, they're often solitary and odd people that it's both good to
know, and also good to avoid.




....


.. |br| raw:: html

   <br/>

.. |sp| raw:: html

   &nbsp;

.. |_| unicode:: 0xA0
   :trim:

.. |__| unicode:: 0xA0 0xA0
   :trim:

.. [RQ] :title:`RuneQuest: Roleplaying in Glorantha`, https://www.chaosium.com/runequest-glorantha/

.. |rq| replace:: *RuneQuest*
