+++
title = "Back to Traveller"
date = 2020-06-01
description = """
After over a year of playing in another setting with my regular Friday group, we
are going to be shifting gears and moving back to a sci-fi themed set of
adventures. I briefly considered using the opportunity to try an entirely new
game, but eventually decided to go back to Traveller and the Commonwealth
setting that I had begun developing when I was last putting new material on this
blog. The return to Traveller, and my home-built setting, should mean more
material on this blog and a re-attempt to experience Classic Traveller as an RPG
with new players.
"""
thumb = "https://dspncdn.com/a1/media/originals/59/48/91/5948912c48c6e067735ee9d13d833624.jpg"
thumbattr = 'retro-futurism in French Children&apos;s Encyclopedias, via <a href="https://www.designspiration.com/save/1279491184616/">Matt Lawson</a>'
categories = ["traveller", "rpg"]
tags = ["prep"]
+++

Why a return to Traveller? Two reasons, really.

An already-familiar setting
---------------------------
The options for choosing some other game, or some other setting, would mean me
having to put another backdrop into my head. For example, I had briefly
considered `Coriolis <https://frialigan.se/en/games/coriolis-2/>`_ game, the
chief advantage being an assumed lower-prep level because of adventures already
being written and published by Fria Lagan. But the game still comes with a
detailed setting and an entirely new set of rules, and this combination seemed
to signal too many hurdles. I also briefly considered rolling my own setting and
using the `Cypher System <http://cypher-system.com/>`_ rules, because I knew from
experience as the referee for a Numenera game that the prep-and-run burden for
the game was actually very low. But this required a new setting from me, from
whole cloth and the burden for creating and managing player characters in the
game is a bit heavier than I'd like currently, and certainly for this group of
players.

But, I decided that I wanted to return to my Commonwealth setting because it had
a *feel* that sat well in my head. The feel might be expressed like: what if you
took The Expanse and The Hyperion Cantos and Battlestar Galactica and Killjoys
and Corto Maltese and Rocco Vargas and Classic Traveller (the game, not the
Imperium) all in a blender and whirred it around -- what would that look like?
Something that was a bit retro-futur but not very, a bit on the hard side but
not very. There isn't a game on my shelf that gives me this setting, really; it
sits there because of my own variety of sources with no single source being a
strong example of what I'd like.

A light set of rules
--------------------
Because of our current medical circumstances, I haven't had any face to face
gaming since the beginning of 2020. But I'm doing more regular rolegaming now
than I did back then. I have three regular groups in flight at the moment, one
of them being as a player. They're all done online via video-conferencing
software. They're liable to stay that way for some time to come: at least
months, if not years. (I'm suspecting, in fact, that we'll get so used to this
mode of interaction that we're *forced* to engage in at the moment, that by the
time we have an option to do otherwise, some of these groups may simply continue
to work *this way* because of the convenience.)

Because of the medium we're now using for play, it means that my play style
leans even more heavily into theatre of the mind, and lighter application of
rule-systems. Lighter character sheets; fewer die rolls; very little in the way
of detailed tactical simulation that can't be managed through verbal description
and conversation.

And I'm fairly convinced that Classic Traveller can excel under these
circumstances based on past experience.

The hook back in
----------------
All I really needed was a premise, a hook back in to the Commonwealth for this
particular group of players. I knew that I wanted to relieve the burden of
accountancy from this group: if they eventually want to be running their own
ship, and doing their own books, and managing their own trade, there may
certainly come an opportunity for that. But I didn't want to *start* the game
with "here's your own ship; go nuts". It took a few days of musing before I had
something I was comfortable with.

The frontier worlds of Hounslow and Becontree always seemed interesting to me:
connected to the expanding Commonwealth currently only be routes known to the
Scout Service; an interesting pair of worlds out on the beyond: one industrial,
the other agricultural.

My premise naturally sprung out of these two factors. The player characters are
all family retainers to a wealthy merchant clan: trusted members of the
entourage, but none of them family members. One of the scions of the family has
been dispatched out from the core worlds to the farthest reaches of the
Commonwealth to "secure long term business interests" that will serve the
family's trade strategy for decades to come.

A bit East India Empire, a bit Dune, a bit Dutch Indonesia, a bit Corto Maltese
larking about the South American coast. I pitched this to the group as "Sort of
like the show Medici. But in space!" and this seemed to work.

I encouraged them all to use an `online character generator
<http://www.batintheattic.com/traveller/>`_. Just push the button a bunch of
times until you find a character you like. I felt that this method would be just
the right level of accessibility for this group of players who might not at this
stage want to sit down with Book One and Supplement Four and some paper and dice
and spend an hour noodling away.

As a result, we now have three player characters and an introduction session
under our belt and a fairly clear picture in my head about where things can go
next.

And, I suppose, more reason for more blog posts.


.. |br| raw:: html

   <br/>

.. |sp| raw:: html

   &nbsp;

.. |_| unicode:: 0xA0
   :trim:

.. |__| unicode:: 0xA0 0xA0
   :trim:
