+++
title = "Building a new Traveller setting"
date = 2018-12-24
description = """
After reading the in-depth series of posts about Traveller over at [Tales to
Astound](https://talestoastound.wordpress.com/tag/traveller-out-of-the-box/), I
decided that I wanted to transition one of my regular groups over to a series
of Traveller adventures set in my own setting, rather than the Third
Imperium. Starting out on the preparation work for it resurrected the warm
memories I had for my first encounter with the little black books, years ago.
"""
categories = ["rpg", "traveller"]
tags = ["prep"]
+++

Chris Kubasik's series of "Out of the Box" posts on Classic Traveller got me
re-thinking about Traveller. It was the first game I ever owned, and I've long
had nostalgic feelings about it, but I've never played as much of it as I'd have
liked. I think that's down to various reasons, but I think one of them was a
distorted view of how complicated I felt it was. Not only "so many rules" but
also "so many unwieldy rules".

In retrospect, I put that feeling down to not having really looked at the core
game in years, and having my memory piled over with acres of "official
Traveller content" over the years (various editions of the rules, various piles
of source material).

Chris' posts got me to rethink my assumptions, and my recent re-embracement of
old-style games (mainly through a years-long campaign run using *Lamentations
of the Flame Princess* [LotFP]_) had shifted my perception on how the old-style
games could be better played -- in a more freewheeling, improvisational,
talk-first-rules-later approach.

Core principles
---------------
Fuelled by Chris' posts and a desire to see a new year usher in a new game, I
organized my thinking for preparations along several core principles.

**smaller scale**. There seems quite compelling evidence that the original
Traveller game was really intended to play out over a much smaller scale
than later content for the game would suggest. One or two subsectors would
provide for "years of play", and thus the vast Imperial sprawl of sectors upon
sectors of worlds offers play groups little more than cognitive load.

This lines up well with sandbox style of play as well: don't prep more than
your players need, and prep it when they need it. Given that players are
unlikely to ever have reliable access to travel that can extend more than a
parsec or two at a time, and given that each subsector is liable to house tens
of worlds, the "one or two subsectors" approach seems quite compelling.

I resolved to align my prep along the principle of smaller scale along two
lines: only a handful of sub-sectors of play, but also I decided I wanted my
entire area of "central authority over known space" to be on a smaller scale;
four subsectors, or a quadrant, comprise all of my setting's known space.

**modest tech levels**. The original game's main setting seemed targeted at
modest levels of technology: space-flight, yes, but the elevated levels of
tech that could be found within the Imperium's core worlds were not necessarily
to be found on the outer rim worlds where the original game proposed that most
play might take place.

Keeping the tech levels more modest would have two effects: it would clamp down
on the reliability and distance of travel, so that players really would be
constrained to a smaller scope of worlds to examine; and, it would increase the
relative value of higher tech equipment, to the players, and to the other
factions in the setting with which the players would interact.

**home-built setting**. The original game proposed that the referee would build
their own setting, using the random world generation tables as fuel for
creativity. Honour the dice to create weird results, and then exercise your
creativity to explain *why* those results happen. Or merely leave the
incongruities as unexplained corners for emergent discovery during play. But,
overall, *build your own sandbox*. Later publications in the Traveller line
fleshed out a fully built setting that, in the early days, was really only
subtly implied and even then, more along thematic lines and less along factual
ones.

Since I knew that the players I would have playing in my game would not
necessarily be Traveller nerds, or even more than casual RPG players, I felt
that having a setting that was a bit more solidly connected to their own
understanding of things and this lead me to think I had two approaches I could
use:

- I could take an established setting from a media-property, file off the
  serial numbers, and then build up a setting around that: "like Star Wars,
  except..." and so on.

- I could build up a setting that had our own solar system and nearby stars as
  the anchor point; rather than make up a set of stars in a galaxy far, far
  away, I could build up a future that presumed Earth at the centre, and
  thereby giving players some cultural anchor point they could identify
  with. Earth, even tens of centuries forward, is, I think, still more
  generally relatable, than "the planet Tardox and its vast star empire".

Having then discovered the *Near Space* supplement [NS]_ for the *Cepheus
Engine*, it provided me with exactly the foundational pieces I could use for
the second approach -- four subsectors of world data built up around the Sol
system, with only the raw physical characteristics roughed in: no starport or
base information; no population, government, or law-level. In short, a
near-space toolbox for building out your own version of those areas of space.

Deciding on the rules
---------------------
Chris' posts lead me to a brief consideration on the rules I wanted to use to
play, and to build out the setting, and why I might want to make certain
changes.

I decided to use the 1981 rules with some small alterations:

- No travel zones.

- Jump route determination from the 1977 rules, not the communication routes
  from 1981 and onward

The travel zones and communication routes were artifacts of Third Imperium
setting details that I didn't want in my setting. Additionally, I was seized by
Chris' point that the feel of a real frontier, out of the reach of effective
central authority, was more bolstered by this approach. (I knew that, later
on, I would have to also adjust encounter tables to consider more of the 1977
approach, to adjust for the varying level of presence of central authority and
its effects on piracy.)

I also decided on a few house-ruled die-modifiers for use with some of the
system and world tables, to help build up a feeling that "worlds near the
centre of the map" would be better connected, and better equipped, on the
whole, than worlds near the edges of the map. I noticed that the original rules
themselves suggested that this kind of thing was expected: something that I had
forgotten, but which Chris' close reading had reminded me of.

Rolling dice
------------
I printed out the relevant pages from *Near Space*, and then with my little
black books at the coffee table, and the printed sheets, I started rolling dice
to fill out the details of the worlds. I haven't finished yet, but I have
already started to notice that the random generation has sparked odd results
that got me thinking about the setting and why some patterns might be the way
they are.

The "roll first and then explain" approach to old-style gaming really does seem
core to the original Traveller experience, as I continue to flesh out my Terran
Commonwwealth setting, I expect to see the effects of this approach to become
more and more prominent.


....

.. [LotFP] :title:`Lamentations of the Flame Princess`, https://rpggeek.com/rpg/6581/lamentations-flame-princess

.. [NS] :title:`Near Space`, https://rpggeek.com/rpgitem/211119/near-space
