+++
title = "What about the neighbours?"
date = 2019-03-05
description = """
Giving meaningful hooks to _Traveller_ characters means having a selection of
patrons, rumours, and information about not just the system the characters are
currently in, but also _the neighbouring_ systems. Where do the players want to
go next? Where will they get money from? Knowing what lies just beyond the jump
threshold helps facilitate these choices.
"""
thumb = "https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/27/Flying_among_the_closest_stars_to_the_Solar_System.ogv/1200px--Flying_among_the_closest_stars_to_the_Solar_System.ogv.jpg"
thumbattr = 'neighbouring stars, <a href="https://www.eso.org/public/videos/eso1404d/">ESO</a>'
categories = ["barbican subsector", "concorde subsector", "traveller", "rpg"]
tags = ["prep"]
+++

Having decided that our player group should start `on the world of Edgware
</2019/02/fleshing-out-a-world/>`_ within the `Barbican subsector
</2018/12/building-out-a-subsector/>`_, and having one session of play under
our belt that boiled down to the player sgetting used to one anothers'
characters and the sketched out facts about their current situation, it makes
sense for me to turn my attention to where the players might choose to go
next. Keeping in mind that hewing to minimal prep is a factor, we really want
to just be laying track right in front of the train. Where might the players be
going right away, in the next session or two.

Knowing that `their ship, The Garden </2019/03/the-price-of-owning-a-yacht/>`_
is only capable of making jump-ones (although it can carry enough fuel to do
this twice before refuelling). The most likely places to go next are the worlds
a single jump-one away: the neighbours.

Edgware has three neighbours a single parsec away: Gant, Oval, and
as-yet-unnamed world off the map around the star 70 Ophiuchi.

Gant
====
On the face of things, Gant looks pretty straightforward and hospitable:

.. code::

   Gant         C89858A/5  Ag, Ni, Gg

A routine quality starport, without the benefit of refined fuel, sits on an
Earth-size world, shrouded by a dense, tainted atmosphere, covered in a bit
more water than Earth. Population is order hundreds-of-thousands. The
government in place is a run-of-the-mill civil service bureaucracy. The
law-level is unusually strict, the tech-level is below average.

Unsurprisingly, Gant doesn't have much going for it, but its conditions are
sufficient to make it a net-exporter of Agricultural goods.

Oval
====
Oval, by contrast, is an intriguing packet of contradictions:

.. code::

   Oval         E8A0ADC/5  Gg

Oval has only a frontier starport installation; odd for a world that's so close
to the centre of the commonwealth. It, too, is an Earth-size world, but has an
exotic atmosphere of some kind (oxygen tanks required), and has no surface
water. What's an odd match for these forbidding physical features is the social
characteristics. Oval boasts a population of order-tens-of-billions, has a
religious dictatorship as central authority, and a highly restrictive law-level
(even more so than Gant).

With no air to breathe, and no water on the surface, and no starport, how does
this world support such a large population?
   
70 Ophiuchi
===========
From the Near Space [NS]_ source of stellar data, we start with this
information about 70 Ophiuchi:

.. code::

   70 Ophiuchi KDV,K4V   x97Axxx-x    Gg, Ab    Temperate


The Near Space book provides the kind of physical data that it can about the
system, but it doesn't flesh out any social details (starbase level, population
law level, government type, etc).

In order to go the next level down of detail on this world, we'd need to:

- Pick a name for the world; this would require us deciding on what
  world-naming pattern to use for the subsector next to Barbican.

  Earlier we had decided to use subway station names for global cities, so
  let's choose *Paris* as the global city to provide names for this subsector.

  Starting from that, we pick *Concorde* as the name for the subsector and
  *Odéon* as the world name for the 70 Ophiuchi system.

- Fill out the rest of its basic characteristics: starport level, population,
  government type, law level, and tech level. The world has a standard,
  although tainted, atmosphere, and is entirely covered by water.

  Because the world is relatively farther away from Sol, we had decided to have
  a DM+1 to the starport roll, so generating that, and the follow-on social UWP
  factors produces this information for the world:

.. code::

   Odéon        C97A630/7  Ab, Ni, Gg

The low rolls for this world produce a strange result: an order-of-millions
population, but a low law level and no central authority to speak of. Perhaps
population on this planet is either in individual sub-surface or
raft/ship-based centres affiliated with off-world corporate research or
on-world clan-based tribes of colonists.

Summing things up
=================
Given what we now know about Edgware's neighbours, where does that leave us?
What kind of relationship does Edgware have with these worlds?

- Gant's status as an agricultural world probably means a steady flow of
  foodstuff shipments that come through Edgware. Perhaps it also means people
  travelling in the other direction: companies sending representatives to keep
  track of their agri-business plantations on Gant, perhaps skilled workers
  (agricultural scientists and the like) and even unskilled labour (as Gant's
  population is significantly lower than the more core worlds).

  Possible patrons headed for Gant might be something like: business people
  looking for security; hunters looking for transport or guides; companies
  seeking to ship industrial parts for farm machinery; or workers looking for
  inexpensive transport.

- Oval's strangely high population combined with its religious, authoritarian
  government, and ultra-high law level suggest that nobody really comes *from*
  Oval to go anywhere, unless they're "official delegations" from their
  government. Oval is neither a sizeable exporter, nor particularly an importer
  of goods, agricultural or industrial. I suspect Oval has a finely tuned,
  sub-surface system that keeps its massive population under control and simply
  fed; no doubt this requires industrial components to keep machinery working.

  Possible patrons headed for Oval might be off-world adherents to the religion
  in control there: pilgrims looking for low-cost transport, or delegates of
  some status willing to pay more. There might be shipments of industrial or
  agricultural materials, but probably basic in nature, and without much
  opportunity for profit.

- Odéon's lawless and non-industrial nature leads one to believe that it's not
  a terribly inviting place to go. Given its generally temperate climate, and
  its water-world status, it's not hard to feel like life on Odéon might be of
  the sort that suits people who would love to spend their lives on a boat.

  Possible patrons headed for Odéon might be: wealthy hunters looking for
  exciting sport fishing experiences; shipments of industrial parts for marine
  upkeep and repair; corporate or government specialists pursuing research in a
  station below the waves.

Because Edgware doesn't have a large population, or industry, it seems highly
likely that it's direct relationship with these worlds is as a customer for
food, or as a waypoint for passenger traffic.
   
....

.. [NS] :title:`Near Space`, https://rpggeek.com/rpgitem/211119/near-space


.. |br| raw:: html

   <br/>

.. |sp| raw:: html

   &nbsp;

.. |_| unicode:: 0xA0
   :trim:

.. |__| unicode:: 0xA0 0xA0
   :trim:
